---
layout:     post
title:      "DCI Flavored Rails"
date:       2015-01-03
summary:    "Experimenting with DCI architecture in a Rails app like it's 2012"
categories: rails
---
DCI (or Data, Context, and Interaction) is a proposed compliment to the widely adopted Model-View-Controller architectural pattern. DCI was invented by [Trygve Reenskaug](), the Norwegian computer scientist who is also the father/author of MVC. Around 2011/2012, DCI received a fair amount of attention within the Ruby and Rails community as an antidote (or perhaps just an alternative) to the less-than-ideal "Fat Model / Skinny Controller" advice that was en vogue at the time.  

And more recently, Jim Gay released his [Clean Ruby]() book which goes into some detail on implementing DCI within Ruby.  After reading Clean Ruby, I was inspired to try DCI within the context of a Rails application.  As with anything in programming, there are always trade-offs.  Read on to see if the pros outweigh cons. 

###Why DCI?
DCI has a number of goals, but at its core it aims to separate *being* from *doing* in a program.  Said another way, DCI provides an architecture for separating what a system is (the domain - which doesn't change very often) from what it does (the business processes and logic -  which are likely to change a lot over the lifetime of the app). Trygve Reenskaug probably said it best:   

>Object-oriented programming was supposed to unify the perspectives of the programmer and the end user in computer code: a boon both to usability and program comprehension. While objects capture structure well, they fail to capture system action. DCI is a vision to capture the end user cognitive model of roles and interactions between them.

If you've worked in a long-lived Rails app, you've likely experienced huge "god" classes (often a `User`) that inherit from ActiveRecord and contain business logic, validations, and knowledge about the entire system.  Any change to a god class is usually painful, and just trying to reason what the system does can require reading hundreds of lines of code.

By giving system behavior first-class status, DCI aims to produce programs that are easier to maintain and reason about. 

###DCI as a Play (An Analogy)
DCI is sometimes explained by comparing it to a play (as in, a theater production).  It's a leaky analogy, but it's a useful starting point:  

D is for **Data** and it represents the (relatively) static data model of an object in our domain.  This is where we represent the user's mental model of *things* within our system.  The trick here is to define the interface to a Data object with enough detail to capture the universal domain properties. We should leave out anything that is unique to a specific scenario or use case. In a Rails app, Data is usually represented by our ActiveRecord objects. And in our play analogy, **a yet-to-be cast actor** could represent a data object.

I is for **Interaction,** which represents the algorithms of how our Data objects interact with one another.  Interactions are defined in terms of *Roles*, which contain behavior for a specific scenario.  In our play, actors (Data) are cast into roles.  A Role comes with lines, stage directions, a costume (etc. etc.) - all specific interactions for a specific scene in our play. It's important to note that once a Data object is finished with its role in the Context, it is stripped (or uncast) of any context specific behavior.   

Finally, C is for **Context,** which encapsulates the business logic of our application. Something is *happening* inside a context, and you should be able to divine what an application does by looking inside its various Contexts.  Within our play analogy, the instructions a director gives to her actors for a specific scene most closely mirrors a DCI Context.  A director *casts* actors into specific roles(which contain information about how to interact with other actors cast into roles), tells them when to enter and exit the scene, and so on.  Often, there's a one-to-one relationship between a use case and a Context. 

In DCI, we are most concerned with the *Interactions* between data objects.  Those *Data* objects are cast as roles depending on the *Context* and specific business use case (more on that later).

### 
{% highlight ruby %}
  def run
    puts "Connecting on port #{@port}"

    loop do
      socket = @server.accept
      request = verb_and_header(socket)

      http_verb = request[:verb]
      request_uri = request[:request_uri]
      headers = request[:headers]

      if headers.has_key? 'Content-Length'
        http_body = body(socket, headers['Content-Length'].to_i)
        headers['Body'] = http_body
        STDERR.puts http_body 
      end

      if http_verb == 'GET'
        get(request_uri, socket)
      elsif http_verb == 'POST'
        post(request, socket)
      elsif http_verb == 'PUT'
        put(request, socket)
      elsif http_verb == 'DELETE'
        delete(request, socket)
      elsif http_verb == 'HEAD'
        head(request, socket)
      end
    end
  end
{% endhighlight %}

###The HTTP Request/Response Cycle
In my server, I'm letting Ruby's `TCPServer` handle the encoding and decoding of the TCP socket connection.  But since we're dealing with a web browser, we know that we'll need to handle and parse HTTP requests.  In most simple terms, here's an HTTP lifecycle for a GET request:

* The browser issues an HTTP request via a TCP socket connection to our IP address.  Assuming our server is up and running, it will accept the connection and open up a socket for two way communication.

* Once the browser confirms a connection, it sends the request. For example:

{% highlight html %}
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.example.com
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 
[blank line here]
{% endhighlight %}

* We'll need to parse the above request, extracting the HTTP verb ('GET' in this case) and the file it's requesting from the server.  The remainder of the request contains the headers, which denote various metadata about the connection.

* Finally, our server should respond in kind along with the contents of the file and then close the connection. For example:
{% highlight html %}
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/plain
Content-Length: 130
Connection: close
[blank line here]
{% endhighlight %}

Let's dive into the last two steps.

###Parsing the Request
Once the socket connection is open between the two computers, we'll need to extract the HTTP verb from the initial request. 

{% highlight ruby %}
  def verb_and_header(socket)
    request = ""
    headers = {}
    while (request_line = socket.gets and request_line != "\r\n")
      request += request_line
    end

    header_params = request.split(/\r?\n/)
    first_line = header_params.shift.split(" ")
    verb = first_line[0]
    request_uri = first_line[1]
    header_params.each do |param|
      key_value = param.split(':')
      headers.merge!(key_value[0] => key_value[1].strip)
    end
    {:verb => verb, :request_uri => request_uri, :headers => headers}
  end
{% endhighlight %}

Since we know how a HTTP/1.1 request will be formatted, we know the http verb will be the first word in the first line, and the requested file will be the following string. Following that will be the header, which we parse and store as key/value pairs in a hash.

###Responding to the Request
Next, back in our REPL we'll need to process the HTTP verb and respond. 

{% highlight ruby %}
  if http_verb == 'GET'
    get(request_uri, socket)
  elsif http_verb == 'POST'
    #post(request, socket)
  elsif http_verb == 'PUT'
    #put(request, socket)
  elsif http_verb == 'DELETE'
    #delete(request, socket)
  elsif http_verb == 'HEAD'
    #head(request, socket)
  end
{% endhighlight %}

In this case, we've got a GET request, so we lookup the requested file and, if it's found, respond with a 200 status code and then print the contents of the file via `IO.copy_stream`.

{% highlight ruby %}
  def get(request_uri, socket)
    path = requested_file(request_uri) 

    if File.directory?(path)
      path = File.join(path, 'index.html')
    end

    # Make sure the file exists and is not a directory
    # before attempting to open it.
    if File.exist?(path) && !File.directory?(path)
      File.open(path, "rb") do |file|
        socket.print "HTTP/1.1 200 OK\r\n" +
                     "Content-Type: #{content_type(file)}\r\n" +
                     "Content-Length: #{file.size}\r\n" +
                     "Connection: close\r\n"

        socket.print "\r\n"

        # write the contents of the file to the socket
        IO.copy_stream(file, socket)
      end
    else
      message = "File not found\n"

      # respond with a 404 error code to indicate the file does not exist
      socket.print "HTTP/1.1 404 Not Found\r\n" +
                   "Content-Type: text/plain\r\n" +
                   "Content-Length: #{message.size}\r\n" +
                   "Connection: close\r\n"

      socket.print "\r\n"

      socket.print message
    end
  end
{% endhighlight %}

###Bottleneck #1: Single Threaded
One clear flaw in my webserver is that it can only open up a single socket at a time.  If a second client made a request while the web server was in the process of dealing with a request from another client, the second client would need to wait until the first process finished.

A production web server like Puma solves this problem by opening up each socket connection in its own `Thread`.  Another solution would be to use Unix forking to run multiple web servers at once (this is the approach of a web server like Unicorn).  Each approach has its pros and cons, but its clear that for a web server to be even slightly usable, it needs some method to handle multiple connections at once.

###Bottleneck #2: Waiting for That Response...
In the full lifecycle of a HTTP web request, most of a server's time is spent waiting for the browser to respond.  So if the code to parse an HTTP request is completed in 2 or 3 milliseconds, waiting for the response might take 10 (or 100) times that long.

The Node.js toolkit offers an alternative architecture that eliminates this "waiting" bottleneck.  Node requires that any function performing I/O must use a callback.  This means that Node can run in a single thread and hop from request to request without waiting for a response from any one client. 

This leads me to...

###Next: Concurrency via Event Based Programming or the Actor Model
Similar to Node.js, Ruby has its own event-based programming library in `EventMachine`.  There are a few web servers built on top of `EventMachine` (Thin being perhaps the most widely used).  It's not really fair to compare Node to Thin, as Rails doesn't enforce an "all I/O via callbacks" rule, but I'm interested in exploring event-based programming as an alternative to Rails' threaded architecture.

Celluloid also offers a framework for concurrency via the Actor model.  I'm going to explore this next.

In the end, waiting for I/O is what really slows down web apps, so that's where optimization can really shine.       









 

